
# GnuspeechSA (Stand-Alone)

GnuspeechSA is a command-line articulatory synthesizer that converts text
to speech.

GnuspeechSA is a C++ port of the TTS_Server in the original [Gnuspeech][]
system developed for NeXTSTEP, provided by David R. Hill, Leonard Manzara,
Craig Schock and contributors.
The base was the code on Gnuspeech's Subversion repository, revision 672,
downloaded in 2014-08-02. The source code was obtained from the directories:

    nextstep/trunk/ObjectiveC/Monet.realtime
    nextstep/trunk/src/SpeechObject/postMonet/server.monet

This software is written in multi-platform C++.

[Gnuspeech]: https://www.gnu.org/software/gnuspeech/

## Gnuspeech

Gnuspeech is an articulatory speech synthesizer. The project implemented the
first articulatory text-to-speech (TTS) software (as far as I know).
It was developed in the 90s, around 30 years ago (in 2023).
Gnuspeech was previously a closed source commercial software, available only
for NeXT computers. After the demise of NeXT, the software was donated to
the [GNU][] project. It uses a simple vocal tract model, because the NeXT was a
very slow computer. The CPUs of the 90s operated at a frequency of tens of MHz
(not a typo), around 100x slower than the technology in 2023. The relative low
complexity of the model makes it not too difficult to understand, and it allows
low latency synthesis on modern personal computers.

[GNU]: https://www.gnu.org

The original TTS system had two implementations of the vocal tract model
(tube model), one that executed on a 56k DSP, written in assembly, and another
that executed on the CPU, written in C. The DSP tube model generates better
speech, with more balanced fricatives/plosives. This repository uses the C
tube model.

## Synthesis examples

The sounds below were synthesized from the text of
[The Chaos (short version)](the_chaos.txt) by Gerard Nolst Trenité.

### Original code (for NeXT) using the DSP vocal tract model

- [English - Male](sound/trillium_tts-the_chaos.mp3)

### GnuspeechSA 0.1.8

- [English - Male       ](sound/gnuspeech_sa-0.1.8-english_male-the_chaos.mp3)
- [English - Female     ](sound/gnuspeech_sa-0.1.8-english_female-the_chaos.mp3)
- [English - Large child](sound/gnuspeech_sa-0.1.8-english_large_child-the_chaos.mp3)
- [English - Small child](sound/gnuspeech_sa-0.1.8-english_small_child-the_chaos.mp3)
- [English - Baby       ](sound/gnuspeech_sa-0.1.8-english_baby-the_chaos.mp3)

## Status

**maintenance**

Only english is supported.

## License

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
COPYING.txt file for more details.

## External code

This software includes code from [RapidXml][], provided by Marcin Kalicinski.
See the file src/rapidxml/license.txt for details.

[RapidXml]: https://rapidxml.sourceforge.net/

## Usage of `gnuspeech_sa`

`gnuspeech_sa` converts the input text to speech.

    ./gnuspeech_sa [-v] -c config_dir -p trm_param_file.txt -o output_file.wav \
            "Hello world."
        Synthesizes text from the command line.
        -v : verbose

        config_dir is the directory that stores the configuration data,
            e.g. data/en.
        trm_param_file.txt will be generated, containing the tube model
            parameters.
        output_file.wav will be generated, containing the synthesized speech.

    ./gnuspeech_sa [-v] -c config_dir -i input_text.txt -p trm_param_file.txt \
            -o output_file.wav
        Synthesizes text from a file.
        -v : verbose

        config_dir is the directory that stores the configuration data,
            e.g. data/en.
        input_text.txt contains the input text.
        trm_param_file.txt will be generated, containing the tube model
            parameters.
        output_file.wav will be generated, containing the synthesized speech.

## Usage of `gnuspeech_sa_trm`

`gnuspeech_sa_trm` executes only the tube model.

    ./gnuspeech_sa_trm [-v] trm_param_file.txt output_file.wav
        -v : verbose

        trm_param_file.txt is the file generated by gnuspeech_sa, containing the
            tube model parameters.
        output_file.wav will be generated, containing the synthesized speech.

## Contents of data/en

### `monet.xml`

Contains the articulatory database.

### `intonation.txt`

Controls the intonation.

If `random_intonation = 0` in `trm_control_model.txt`, only the first
line in each tone group will be used. If `random_intonation = 1`, the
line will be randomly selected.

### `MainDictionary.txt`

Contains the main dictionary, which relates words to postures.

### `trm.txt`

Contains the parameters for the tube model.

Interesting parameters are:

        vocal_tract_length_offset
            This value is added to the vocal tract length.
        loss_factor
            Defines the acoustic loss inside the vocal tract.

### `trm_control_model.txt`

Contains the parameters for the tube model controller.

Interesting parameters are:

        voice_name
            Defines the voice used in the synthesis.
            It selects which of the voice_*.txt files will be
            loaded.
        tempo
            Values greater than 1 will speed up the speech.
        pitch_offset
            Modifies the voice pitch.

        drift_deviation
        drift_lowpass_cutoff
            Control the random perturbations in the intonation
            (requires intonation_drift = 1).

        dictionary_1_file
        dictionary_2_file
        dictionary_3_file
            Indicate the dictionaries (the dictionaries will be
            searched in the order 1, 2, 3).

Note:

The following parameters are not being used at the moment:

- notional_pitch
- pretonic_range
- pretonic_lift
- tonic_range
- tonic_movement

### `voice_baby.txt`

### `voice_female.txt`

### `voice_large_child.txt`

### `voice_male.txt`

### `voice_small_child.txt`

Contain the voice parameters.

Interesting parameters are:

        vocal_tract_length

        glottal_pulse_tp
            Rise time, in % of the period.
        glottal_pulse_tn_min
            Fall time, in % of the period - for the highest pulse
            amplitude.
        glottal_pulse_tn_max
            Fall time, in % of the period - for the lowest pulse
            amplitude.

            These parameters modify the glottal pulse shape.

        reference_glottal_pitch
            Modify the voice pitch.

        breathiness

### `vowelTransitions.txt`

Controls vowel transitions.

### `vowelTransitions_2.txt`

Alternative version of `vowelTransitions.txt`.

It is not being used.
